# [Autonomous Anomaly Detection of Tree Crown Isolations](Poster.pdf)

Precision agriculture is a science gaining traction in orchard management studies. It is an advanced monitoring methodology that uses sensors and computer analysis to aid farmers in improving crop yields, utilisation of resource inputs, and management strategies. Sensors are fitted to unmanned aerial vehicles to capture aerial photogrammetry images of orchards at different wavelengths. Serving as a rich data source that can be analysed using computer vision techniques, precision agriculture in orchard management is highly dependent on the high-throughput phenotyping of tree crowns to collect decision-making information.
Consequently, this suggests that the most critical component of the analysis is the extraction or delineation of the “individual” tree crowns. This delineation defines the boundary and location where a single tree appears to exist. The delineation of each tree can be extracted using individual tree crown detection and delineation algorithms. Over time, these algorithms have evolved from classical machine vision techniques to more reliable, automatic and generalisable machine learning techniques. While these methods effectively define the boundary of the tree, they are not without error. Poorly estimated delineations limit the potential for automated individual tree crown detection and delineation in orchard management studies. These poor delineations appear as false positives (ground pixels identified as trees), under-segmented (many crowns identified as one), and over-segmented (one tree identified as many) delineations. There is a need to identify these irregular patterns for correction. This work explored several automatic and generalisable anomaly detection techniques to identify these outlying tree crown delineations. This study utilised many popular local and global outlier detection techniques. Local outlier detection methods, such as local outlier factor, could detect both local and global outliers while maintaining better performance accuracy than global methods. A novel approach, utilising the Local Geary C statistic in a multivariate context, was also tested as a local outlying technique. This demonstrated adequate performance, contributing to the lack of literature surrounding multivariate contextual anomaly detection in spatial studies. The results indicate that image analysis features define the anomalous class better than vegetative indices. In general, this study identified the targeted anomalies and suggested a feature space to be used for further research.

---

[Paper link](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-96262-2_14)
Baleni, E., Marais, P., Er, Ş. (2026). Autonomous Anomaly Detection of Orchard Tree Crown Delineations. In: Gerber, A. (eds) South African Computer Science and Information Systems Research Trends. SAICSIT 2025. Communications in Computer and Information Science, vol 2583. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-96262-2_14
